Well, we are going to start a new series this fall called Long Journey Home, Navigating the Wilderness.
You know, every journey has a beginning.
I don't know about you, but I often find myself planning and thinking ahead about trips, weeks and months in advance.
before our car ever leaves the driveway.
I've been researching Airbnbs and tourist attractions and best routes to travel.
And in one sense, you could say that the trip started as soon as I started to research all those different parts of my trip, the routes and the Airbnbs and all of that.
Because those things are all part of the trip becoming a reality.
But you know how it is, there comes that moment
When the trip becomes more than just an idea or a dream or a packing list, there comes the moment that the trip actually begins.
Earlier this summer, I think you know that Burnett and I had the chance to go with a team of 11 others to Uganda.
And we had a great time ministering there with them.
But when the rest of the team headed home back to the States,
Burnett and I detoured, and we went to Gambia and then into Senegal.
And we did that because we wanted to visit our youngest son and his wife.
They've been serving there with Peace Corps and a little village in Senegal.
And the final homeward bound leg of the trip, though, started from this little hotel way out in Gambia.
And I do mean way out in Gambia.
We had this amazing visit with our kids.
But when it was time to go home, I had an idea.
Because I knew that when the moment came that we actually stepped out of the door of our hotel room there in Gambia, that we wouldn't stop traveling until we stepped back in the door of our house in swim.
So when we stepped out of that hotel room, I decided to press the button on the stopwatch on my phone.
And I kept it running.
I kept it running as we walked down this dark, dirt street in this little village trying to get to the bus stop, the bus that would take us all the way back to Banjul.
I kept it running for the six hours that we rode on the bus through these very rough African roads and had the live chicken on the bus with us and every bit of it.
I kept it running as we flew on multiple flights.
every layover that we encountered, I kept the watch running.
I kept it running when we got off the plane at SeaTac, we got back to our car and made the drive back home, and I didn't hit the stop button until we stepped through our front door here in swim, and it said 41 hours, 30 minutes, 13 seconds.
It was a long trip.
Now, there have been lots of planning that had gone on ahead of time.
And there were buses with live chickens and planes with narrow seats and airports with long lines all along the way.
But the crucial starting point of that homework journey happened the moment that we crossed the threshold of that doorway of our little hotel in Gambia.
Now today we're going to start this new 12 week series.
We're going to be looking at the famous journey of the children of Israel out of slavery in Egypt.
on a wilderness trek that took them not 40 hours, but 40 years on their way to a new, divinely promised homeland.
And I have an idea as we're doing this.
I would like to invite you to keep a travel log.
Over the next 12 weeks, we're gonna be looking at some of the highlights of this amazing journey.
And I would like for you to just try and get maybe a little notebook, pad of paper,
and follow along each week as we highlight different aspects of Israel's journey and take some time outside of Sunday morning to read the story for yourself.
And as you're reading it, ponder how aspects of Israel's physical journey might parallel your own spiritual journey.
And as you do that, I'd like for you to write down the connections that you're making.
Ask the Holy Spirit to
use Israel's story in a fresh way to teach you about how he's leading in your life.
And you might even want to take some side trips.
We're not going to be able to hit everything, every part of Israel's journey through the wilderness.
And as you're reading, there may be things that the war kind of brings to mind.
They jump out at you and feel free to go down those bunny trails and see where it takes you, what you learn from it.
And along the way, if you care to, I'd love to hear some of your stories.
Where are you discovering?
Where are the connections that you're making as you think about your life and the journey of Israel?
When we think about the children of Israel and their journey to the promised land, we realize that there were all sorts of things that had preceded it.
There was a long history of people and events that saw God bringing his people into the land of Egypt.
When they first got there, they were honored guests.
But over time,
Ultimately, they were reduced to slaves, reduced to crying out to God for deliverance from their slavery.
And then along came Moses, a man who had a unique journey of his own.
As you know, when he was born, Pharaoh had this rule out that all the male babies of the Israelites were to be put to death because they were worried about an overpopulation of slaves, that the slaves might become more powerful than the Egyptian.
Moses was spared.
Not only was he spared, he was adopted into Pharaoh's household by one of Pharaoh's daughters.
And so he was a man who lived at the height of power and privilege even as an Israelite within Egypt.
And then his life took a dramatic turn.
And he found himself suddenly not at the height of power, but literally living as an outcast on the run for his very life.
But then, called by God,
to return, to go back to his people with this specific assignment of freeing them from their captivity.
And you probably know how the story went, how Moses returned and there were those plagues, the 10 plagues that were poured out by God on the Egyptians.
And yet every time Pharaoh, with a hard heart, refused to release his slaves.
Each of those plagues corresponded to the false gods that Egypt worshiped.
In other words, God was making it clear that his power was greater than all of the false powers that Egypt was trusting in.
Rather than being their helpers, those idols ultimately became their curse.
In one sense, all of those preceding events, the entire 400 years that Israel had been in Egypt, could be seen as part of Israel's journey.
But if you're gonna start a stopwatch on that trip,
that trip through the wilderness, I wouldn't start it until plague number 10.
Prior to that, Pharaoh kept saying, no go.
But when plague 10 struck, Pharaoh finally shouted, go, get out, get out now.
And since that is the point where I'd hit the start button on the stopwatch, let's focus on that this morning and see what we can learn.
I want to take you to Exodus chapter 12.
We're going to look at the first 14 verses.
The Lord said to Moses, and Aaron, in the land of Egypt, this month shall be for you the beginning of months.
It shall be the first month of the year for you.
Tell all the congregation of Israel that on the 10th day of this month, every man shall take a lamb according to their father's houses, a lamb for a household.
If the household is too small for a lamb, then he and his nearest neighbor shall take according to the number of persons.
According to what each person can eat, you shall make your count for the lamb.
Your lamb shall be without blemish, a male, year old.
You may take it from the sheep or from the goats, and you shall keep it until the 14th day of this month, when the whole assembly of the congregation of Israel shall kill their lambs at twilight.
Then they shall take some of the blood and put it on the two door posts and the lentil of the houses in which they eat it.
They shall eat the flesh that night, roasted on the fire with unloving bread and bitter herbs, they shall eat it.
Do not eat any of it raw or boiled in water, but roasted.
As head with its legs and its inner parts, and you shall let none of it remain until the morning, anything that remains until the morning, you shall burn.
In this manner, you shall eat it.
With your belt fastened, your sandals on your feet, and your staff in your hand, and you shall eat it in haste, it is the Lord's Passover.
For I will pass through the land of Egypt that night, and I will strike all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast,
And on all the gods of Egypt, I will execute judgments.
I am the Lord.
The blood shall be assigned for you on the houses where you are.
And when I see the blood, I will pass over you.
And no plague will befall you to destroy you when I strike the land of Egypt.
This day shall be for you in Memorial Day.
And you shall keep it as a feast to the Lord throughout your generations as a statute forever.
You shall keep it as a feast.
What a terrifying judgment.
Death on the first board.
And what a strange mode of protection.
A lamb.
Three things I want to draw your attention to this morning.
The first is the dinner.
Second, we're look at the dinner party.
And third, I want to look at the dress code for the dinner.
So the dinner.
A lamb.
What a strange mode of protection if you think about it.
Israel, your protection from the destroyer is going to be a lamb dinner and a bit of blood on the door frame of your house, which doesn't sound like much protection to me.
I would have suggested barring the door with heavy beans.
or boarding up the windows, or sneaking home a wheelbarrow loader to a bricks from the worksite to reinforce the doors in the windows.
I mean, if the destroyer is coming, do something that's going to really protect you.
Not only will the lamb be their protection from death, it's also going to be their key to freedom.
The reason that they were living and breathing and not overwhelmed with grief and funerals when the command to go was given was because they'd been protected by the lamb.
About 20 years ago, I had the opportunity to travel with a team to Cambodia.
We were looking at some potential work sites.
And while we were there, there was an invitation extended to us by a Cambodian general.
It turns out that some of his soldiers had found a live cobra.
And while supposedly cobras were protected in Cambodia, I guess if you're a general, you can do what you want.
And there was a ritual that had been around for years among the Cambodians.
that if you took a living cobra and you killed it, but you took out it still beating heart and you put it into vodka and then you drank shots of the vodka with cobra blood in it, it was supposed to give you greater strength and courage.
Most of us, perhaps not surprisingly, found reasons to excuse ourselves from the dinner.
One of our guys, though, decided he was going to go.
because you know how it is.
In any group, there is always that one guy.
And he was it.
So he tried vodka and then ended up violently ill all night and discovered that he received absolutely no sympathy from the rest of us.
Now, I have zero interest in drinking anything containing cobra blood.
But I have to admit, it's easy to see how you could think
that doing so might give you some kind of an extra power boost.
I mean, that's a pretty powerful creature, powerful poison it, it kills.
And so what doesn't kill you makes you stronger, right?
But God didn't tell the children of Israel to go cobra hunting.
He told them to lay hands on a lamb.
I don't know anyone who is intimidated by lambs.
In fact, I can't think really of a more tranquil, less dangerous creature than a lamb.
If the destroyer is coming, wouldn't you want something more dangerous than a lamb protecting you?
If you know your Bible, then I'm sure you recognize the important role that lambs play throughout.
In the Old Testament, lambs play a central role in the religious observances of the people.
Certainly in this Passover feast, the lamb was central.
The lambs could be offered as sin offerings.
When the high priest made his yearly offering for the sins of the nation, it was a lamb that gave up its life on the altar.
And when we come to the New Testament, lambs again play this important role.
When the angels announced Jesus' birth, it was to who?
It was to shepherds, keeping watch over lambs by night.
Many scholars are convinced because of the location
where that angelic visit occurred, that these shepherds were the ones in charge of caring for the temple sanctioned flock from which the Passover lambs were selected.
When John the Baptist first laid eyes on Jesus standing there at the Jordan River, you recall what he proclaimed.
He said, behold, the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world.
And later when the Apostle John had his vision, as recorded in the book of Revelation, he says that he saw standing before the throne of God a lamb that appeared to have been slain.
But it was standing.
It was a living lamb, even though it appears it had been put to death.
And then here's the song that John heard, the host of heaven singing about the lamb.
They sang a new song saying, were there you to take the scroll and to open its seals, for you were slain, and by your blood, you ransomed people for God from every tribe and language and people and nation, and you've made them a kingdom and priests to their God, and they shall reign on the earth.
The Lamb.
Maybe you've seen speed painters who start with a blank slate.
And within a few minutes, they start smearing paint all over the canvas and what looks like just this chaotic swirl of colors.
And then at the last minute, they spend the painting over and you realize the picture they've been painting all along.
of what God was up to, all through the Old Testament.
In bold strokes, he begins painting a picture.
It's a picture that oftentimes seems dark, sometimes confusing.
The worst impulses of the human heart are on full display, and with them, death and judgment lurk.
But also, it's a picture where lambs oddly appear as agents of sacrifice and salvation.
And then suddenly the canvas of biblical history is spun 180 degrees.
And we see what he's really been painting all along.
Human failure still darkens the picture.
But the one who truly saves is God's lamb.
Those Old Testament lambs have all been really portraits of Jesus.
Now here's the thing about those upside down surprise paintings.
Once you know what the painting is, once you've seen it flipped right side up, you can't unsee it.
If you start the whole process over right away, you see what's going on.
It makes a lot more sense.
In fact, I understand there are artists who intentionally paint upside down because they feel that it helps them to see the subject even better in fresh ways.
Looking through that clarifying lens, the New Testament back to that first Passover feast,
You can't help but see it with fresh eyes.
The people who cried out for freedom from their slavery, the people who stood in danger of death from the destroyer.
And don't forget it wasn't just the Egyptians that were in danger.
The Lord said the Israelites would face death as well if they ventured outside.
In other words, there was nothing inherently better or stronger or more noble about them than there was the Egyptians.
They were in the same
Danger.
In fact, if you look at the later history of Israel, and this summer we spent our time looking at the minor prophets, and you recall the minor prophets call out the children of Israel over and over again for their oppression of the poor, for their greed, for their sin, and you realize that in their hearts they were just as prone to abusing others as those who abused them.
The only thing they lacked in Egypt was the power to do so.
They were not spared due to their moral excellence.
They were offered and escaped purely by grace.
They were saved by grace through faith.
They placed their faith in what Moses had told them to do with the lamb.
They found the key to their freedom and the saving of their lives under the protection of a perfect lamb who gave its life for theirs.
How can you not see the picture of Jesus there?
A perfect one giving up his life in place of ours.
And in that sacrifice offering us freedom from the things that enslave us, the promise of life, eternal life in its fullest.
Of course, there's a whole sermon that could be preached on why Jesus had to die.
To a lot of modern people, that sounds too extreme.
It's too mystical.
It's too esoteric.
It's too primitive an idea to think that somehow this man dying could have a moral impact on my own life, that my wrongs could be forgiven because of his sacrifice.
But I think it's only because we've been too influenced by cultural voices that have tried to strip away our sense of moral duty before God.
We make too little.
of the moral consequence before God of our own wrongs.
We have attempted to eliminate any sense of guilt for breaking God's rules by maintaining that everybody should be free to set their own rules.
You have your truth.
I have my truth.
We all have our own truth.
As long as you're trying to live by your truth consistently, we'd like to think that that was enough.
Have you ever played a game with a highly competitive five-year-old?
Among my grandchildren, there are a few of those.
And if you notice that if you start to win, they change the rules.
You get five-year-old rules.
Now, if you watch them close, you'll realize that they break their own rules.
And when they do, they make new rules to cover for the rules that they just broke.
When it comes to life, I think even the most avid proponent of individual freedom
will still find themselves in situations where they feel cheated or wronged.
In other words, they feel like there's some rule that has been broken that should have been kept and they've been left on the short end of the stick.
I think we all know in our most honest moments that there is such a thing as good and evil.
You may want to talk around it, but when it happens to you, you know the difference between good and evil.
If there is such a thing as good, then there must be a standard greater than our own that we are liable to.
And if there's a standard greater than our own, then there must be a standard setter who is above all.
There is some referee bigger than us that makes the final judgment.
And if we have at any point and in any way slipped
are hairy little toes over the boundary line of that ultimate standard, then we have a genuine problem.
The Bible says that every person who has ever lived has at some point stepped over the line.
All have sinned.
And while I don't much care to apply that concept to myself, I'm just honest enough to admit that it is true of me.
and I have a sneaking suspicion, it might be true of you too.
But the Bible also tells us that God is more than simply the final referee.
He is also the ultimate source of love, which creates a genuine tension.
How can the final referee who by his nature cannot ignore the final rules
Do other than penalize people, people he supremely loves.
The Bible's answer is that God chose not only to blow the whistle, but also to take the penalty card to himself.
Is there still a mystery to this?
Absolutely.
If you think you can explain everything about God, I would love to hear the answer right after the service.
He's big.
He's bigger than we are.
He is mysterious.
I'm sure many of those frightened Israelites on that fateful night questioned the mechanics of how a lamb dinner and some blood on the doorpost could save them from an unseen, deadly destroyer.
But whether they could explain it all or not, they grabbed hold of the hope that had been given and it worked.
I don't know your story.
But if you've never seriously considered the offer to surrender your life to Jesus, if you've held back because you're not really sure how it could really work, and yet your heart also feels enslaved to something that is greater than you have the power in your own strength to conquer, or hopeless despite your best efforts to find happiness on your own, could I just say,
that many of us here were once where you are.
But there came a time.
Sometimes it came in a desperation.
Sometimes it came out of careful thought.
Sometimes it was because we felt a tug or a push in our hearts that mystified us, but we could only recognize it as being God, giving us a nudge.
And we took that step of faith.
And we discovered that it works.
As I was studying this, my intention was certainly drawn to the powerful imagery of the lamb.
I mean, how could it not be?
But something else caught my eye as well.
And that was the dinner guests.
When I was running my business, I used to find myself often out on the road, out doing sales.
And in the early days, smartphones were not a thing.
And sitting in a restaurant by yourself is pretty boring.
You can only read the menu so many times.
And I figured out pretty quickly that I much preferred eating by myself in the car.
I could listen to the radio.
I didn't have to make awkward contact with other diners as they wondered what was socially wrong with me that nobody would have dinner with me.
But it turns out that eating alone has become more and more common.
maybe because smartphones have made it easier for us to tune out our surroundings.
I was looking at some stats that said that online restaurant reservations for parties of one have increased by 64% since 2019.
Lots and lots of people eating all by themselves.
Now that doesn't mean that we are happier or more secure people.
Researchers who compiled the World Happiness Report concluded that meal sharing
is a stronger predictor of well-being than income or unemployment combined.
You just spot the very explicit instructions that the Passover meal was not to be eaten alone.
Every man shall take the lamb according to their father's houses and a lamb for a household.
And if there aren't enough people in your household to eat a whole lamb, invite some neighbors.
There was to be a group of you together on that night eating the lamb.
I don't think that was simply a clean your plate rule that God has something against leftovers.
The whole story, the wilderness journey from Egypt to the promised land is a mass migration.
It is not a solo journey of people eating off of TV trays and brown sack lunches.
It's not the adventure of Daniel Boone or Davy Crockett or the Lone Ranger.
It is God's people together, journeying together.
And you see that together principle repeated again and again.
You see it in the New Testament.
After the resurrection, Jesus told his disciples to go and wait together for the outpouring of the Holy Spirit.
And the Holy Spirit was poured out one of the most visible effects of the Spirit's presence was a dynamic
community life.
Acts 2, all the believers met together in one place and shared everything they had.
They worshiped together at the temple each day, met in homes for the Lord's Supper together and shared their meals with great joy and generosity together.
And in each day, the Lord added to their fellowship, to their togetherness, those who were being saved.
I think you all know that I have a love-hate relationship with our Sunday morning live stream.
COVID pushed us into that world.
Quite honestly, one of the last things on my list of life goals was to ever become a TV preacher.
But I also appreciate the blessing it is for many.
For some of you that are watching the service this morning and because of health issues,
You can't be here or because people are traveling or some folks that live far away and yet tune in and get some teaching from this.
And that's great.
I am super glad that we're able to offer that.
But I regularly hear stories of people who have given up regular personal involvement in a local fellowship and have substituted for it a curated list of
YouTube favorite preachers and musicians, which is nothing more than the drive-through restaurant dining version of church.
You whizz through with as little a connection as possible.
You pick from the menu, whatever strikes your fancy, and then you race on to the next thing.
I mentioned Sunday mornings because it's an easy place to make the point, but what I'm getting at is more than just Sunday church attendance.
You can show up on a Sunday morning and turn that into a drive-through experience as well.
You can rush in late just in time to catch the sermon.
You can be lying out as soon as the final song starts, and you can avoid anything more than an obligatory smile to one of the ushers at the door.
If you're gonna make the journey with Jesus deep and successful, you need traveling companions.
There need to be other people with you at the table.
You need to give time regularly to be with other Christians, to spend time in God's Word, to spend time in prayer, to spend time getting to know each other well enough that you know how to serve each other, and you know how to care for each other when you're hurting.
Let me just give you three practical suggestions.
One, I would say make in-person attendance on Sunday a priority.
Not the thing you do if you can't think of anything else.
And then don't rush out.
In fact, make some space.
Make some space to invite someone to go to lunch with you after the service.
Have something extra on the stove at home that it'd be easy to invite someone over.
Over the years, Burnett and I have learned to do that.
There are Sundays that we say each other before we get to church, hey, we should find someone that we go to lunch with afterwards.
We're extending what's happening here to build more community.
And then third, I would say get into a life group.
If you're not in some kind of a rarely meeting Bible study group, home fellowship group, you should be.
And we have a lot of them.
Pastor Lance does a wonderful job of helping those groups get together and get organized.
And if you're not in one, talk to Lance about that.
Get in one.
All right, the third thing I want us to look at is the dinner dress code.
This stood out to me as I was reading over these Passover instructions because not only were they told what to eat, and not only were they told with whom they were to eat, they're also told how to dress for dinner.
and the instructions are really strange.
Here's what it says.
In this manner you shall eat it with your belt fastened, your sandals on your feet, your staff in your hand, and you shall eat in haste.
It is the Lord's Passover.
Now just think about the situation.
It's nighttime.
You're about to eat the final meal of the day.
All that's left after dinner is going to bed.
You have strict instructions too that you're not to leave the house all night on penalty of death.
In other words, you're not going anyplace tonight.
And of course, the culture of the day dictates that you leave your shoes, your sandals at the door before you enter the house.
You never wear your shoes in the house.
And so given that environment, what would be the appropriate attire for dinner?
Maybe slippers for dinner?
Something comfortable?
Certainly I'm going to loosen my belt, because I know what happens when I have dinner.
Maybe something really comfy, like even a robin pajamas, because you know that bedtime is next.
I see people that show up at Walmart dressed that way in the middle of the day.
But instead, they're told
to put on traveling clothes.
Cinch up your belt.
Get your shoes on.
Have your walking stick in your hand.
The text actually says your staff, which probably means it was more than just a walking stick.
It was the shepherd's tool to herd sheep and goats.
So you're ready to go to work.
And then wolf your dinner down.
Eat in haste.
In other words, don't eat this meal like you're setting in for a long winter's night.
You're supposed to eat it like your morning alarm didn't go off and you're late for work.
Imagine the odd scene, these folks sitting at the dinner table.
It's dark outside.
They know they need to stay in, but there they sit, fully dressed for work.
Shepherd staffs in one hand, fork in the other, chomping down their dinner exactly the way their mother always told them not to eat.
So what does that imagery tell us?
Well, it tells us that God was saving His people for a journey, and He wanted them to be ready to move out at the first opportunity.
That household protected by the blood of the Lamb was not the destination.
It was only this starting line.
If there's been a mistake that we've made in the American church, oftentimes in evangelism, we have treated it as though a person coming to Jesus, going to the old Billy Graham crusade and walking the aisle,
and signing the card.
We've acted as though that was the destination.
It's not.
It's just the start of the journey.
It's a good image to keep in mind as we start the Christian life.
Placing our faith in Jesus is not the end of the story.
The point of being a Christian is not simply a decision to believe, it is a decision to follow.
The blood of Jesus saves us.
But then his spirit fills us and he calls us to move out.
And coming to faith, we must come to the cross, but we must not stop there.
Mark chapter eight, calling the crowd to him with his disciples, he said to them, if anyone would come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me.
We are called
to a journey.
It is a journey with a cross.
There are sacrifices that will be made not just as our Jesus made that sacrifice, but as we follow Him, there will be sacrifices in life.
It is a journey.
In the coming weeks, we're going to join the Israelites as they make their way from Egypt to the Promised Land.
And we're going to see that it was a long journey to get to their promised home.
There was a journey that had both victories and defeats,
It had triumphs, it had failures, lots of failures.
But like every journey, there was a starting point.
That night of Passover marked the threshold of that journey, a threshold that was marked by the blood of a lamb sacrificed so that they could be saved.
It was a journey that we're called to make together.
And in a journey that they were to be focused and ready to undertake on a moment's notice.
So how well does that powerful imagery of Passover reflect your own journey?
What would you put in your travel log about your own walk with God?
Have you honestly investigated and committed your life to Jesus?
The one the Bible says is God's lamb, lovingly given for our freedom and life.
If you have embraced what Jesus has done for you, have you also embraced a core of like-minded people to journey with?
Are you prioritizing that relationship?
And if you start with the journey, what's on your feet?
Are you wearing slippers or boots?
What's in your hand?
Is it a staff or a remote control?
There is a long journey ahead.
Let's get started.
Let's pray.
Father, thank you.
Thank you for providing the lamb.
Lord Jesus, thank you for being willing to be the sacrifice that we have all needed for giving us freedom, a way to begin the journey out of slavery into true life.
Thank you that you've not called us to make the journey alone.
You have given us your spirit.
You've given us brothers and sisters to share the journey with.
Lord, I pray for any of my friends here this morning that have not yet started that journey.
Father, I pray that they would hear how much you love them and how free and open the offer is.
For those of us who have responded, Lord, I pray that if we are sitting there with our slippers and remote control, that you would give us the nudge that we need to get up and follow you with a full heart.
Lord, I'm convinced that what you have set in front of us is a beautiful, promised land.
Help us, Lord, not to miss out on the journey with you.
I pray this in Jesus' name.
Amen.